REUSABLE_ACTIONS_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Reusable GitHub Actions - Summary

## ✅ What Was Copied

I've copied three reusable composite actions from `dr-rs-ekg` to:

- **cargo-fmt-toml**
- **cargo-version-info**
- **dotenvage**

## 📦 Actions Copied

### 1. setup-cargo-binstall

**Source:** `dr-rs-ekg/.github/actions/setup-cargo-binstall/`

**What it does:**

- Installs `cargo-binstall` for fast binary installations
- Caches the binary between workflow runs
- Cross-platform support (Linux, macOS, Windows)

**Benefits:**

- ⚡ 10-50x faster than `cargo install` for most tools
- 💾 Cached, so subsequent runs are instant
- 🌍 Works across all platforms

**Usage in workflows:**

```yaml
- name: Setup cargo-binstall
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cargo-binstall
```

---

### 2. setup-cocogitto

**Source:** `dr-rs-ekg/.github/actions/setup-cocogitto/`

**What it does:**

- Installs Cocogitto (`cog`) version 6.5.0
- Uses cargo-binstall for fast installation
- Caches the binary between workflow runs

**Benefits:**

- ⚡ Much faster than `cargo install --locked cocogitto`
- 💾 Cached, so subsequent runs are ~instant
- 🔒 Pinned version ensures consistency
- 🎯 Automatically configures PATH

**Before (slow):**

```yaml
- name: Install cocogitto
  run: cargo install --locked cocogitto  # Takes 2-5 minutes!
```

**After (fast):**

```yaml
- name: Setup Cocogitto
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cocogitto  # Takes ~5 seconds, cached = instant
```

**Applied to:** `cargo-fmt-toml/.github/workflows/auto-version-bump.yml`

---

### 3. generate-changelog

**Source:**

- `dr-rs-ekg/.github/actions/generate-changelog/`
- `dr-rs-ekg/.bash/gha-generate-changelog.sh`

**What it does:**

- Generates changelog from conventional commits
- Uses Cocogitto internally
- Smart handling of tags that don't exist yet
- Falls back gracefully for first release

**Benefits:**

- 📝 Automatic changelog generation
- 🎯 Consistent format across repositories
- 🛡️ Handles edge cases (no previous tag, tag not yet created)
- 🧪 Testable bash script (can run locally)

**Before (manual):**

```yaml
- name: Generate changelog
  run: |
    LAST_TAG=$(git describe --tags --abbrev=0 HEAD^ 2>/dev/null || echo "")
    if [ -z "$LAST_TAG" ]; then
      CHANGES=$(git log --pretty=format:"- %s" HEAD^..HEAD)
    else
      CHANGES=$(git log --pretty=format:"- %s" $LAST_TAG..HEAD^)
    fi
    # ... lots more bash code ...
```

**After (clean):**

```yaml
- name: Generate changelog
  uses: ./.github/actions/generate-changelog
  with:
    release-tag: v${{ env.NEW_VERSION }}
    output-file: CHANGELOG.md
```

**Applied to:** `cargo-fmt-toml/.github/workflows/auto-version-bump.yml`

---

## 📁 Files Added to Each Repository

### Directory Structure:

```
repo/
├── .bash/
│   └── gha-generate-changelog.sh    # Bash script for changelog generation
├── .github/
│   └── actions/
│       ├── README.md                # Documentation for all actions
│       ├── setup-cargo-binstall/
│       │   └── action.yml
│       ├── setup-cocogitto/
│       │   └── action.yml
│       └── generate-changelog/
│           └── action.yml
```

### Total Files Added:

- 4 action.yml files
- 1 bash script
- 1 README documentation

**Size:** ~350 lines of YAML + bash total

---

## 🎯 Impact on cargo-fmt-toml Workflow

### Before:

```yaml
- uses: dtolnay/rust-toolchain@stable

- name: Install cocogitto
  run: |
    cargo install --locked cocogitto    # 🐌 2-5 minutes every run

# ... manual version bump ...

- name: Generate changelog
  run: |
    # 20 lines of bash
    LAST_TAG=$(git describe --tags ...)
    # ... complex logic ...
```

### After:

```yaml
- uses: dtolnay/rust-toolchain@stable

- name: Setup Cocogitto (cached)
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cocogitto    # ⚡ ~5s first run, instant after

# ... version bump ...

- name: Generate changelog
  uses: ./.github/actions/generate-changelog    # ✨ Clean and simple
  with:
    release-tag: v${{ env.NEW_VERSION }}
    output-file: CHANGELOG_RELEASE.md
```

### Benefits:

- ⚡ **Faster:** 2-5 minutes → 5 seconds (first run) → instant (cached)
- 🧹 **Cleaner:** Less inline bash, more declarative
- 🔒 **Consistent:** Same cocogitto version across all repos
- 📝 **Better:** Smarter changelog generation
- 🧪 **Testable:** Bash script can be run locally

---

## 🌍 Cross-Repository Benefits

### Shared Actions Across Repositories:

All three repositories now share the same actions:

1. **cargo-fmt-toml** - Using in auto-version-bump workflow
2. **cargo-version-info** - Ready to use in future workflows
3. **dotenvage** - Ready to use in future workflows

### Maintenance:

When updating an action:

1. Update in `dr-rs-ekg` (source of truth)
2. Copy to other repositories
3. All repos stay consistent

### Future Opportunities:

These actions can be used in any workflow that needs:

- Version management
- Changelog generation
- Fast tool installation
- Release automation

---

## 📊 Performance Comparison

### Cocogitto Installation Time:

| Method                        | First Run | Cached   |
| ----------------------------- | --------- | -------- |
| `cargo install --locked`      | 2-5 min   | 2-5 min  |
| `cargo-binstall` (manual)     | ~10 sec   | ~10 sec  |
| **`setup-cocogitto` (action)**| **~5 sec**| **~1 sec**|

**Savings:**

- First run: ~2-4 minutes faster
- Cached runs: ~2-5 minutes faster
- Over 10 workflow runs: **~30-50 minutes saved**

---

## 🚀 Next Steps

### For cargo-fmt-toml:

✅ Actions already integrated into `auto-version-bump.yml`

### For cargo-version-info:

Actions are available but not yet integrated into workflows. Consider
using in:

- Release workflows
- Version management
- Changelog generation for releases

### For dotenvage:

Actions are available but not yet integrated into workflows. Consider
using in:

- Release workflows
- Version management
- Changelog generation for releases

### For All Repos:

When creating new workflows that need version management or changelog
generation, use these actions instead of inline scripts.

---

## 📚 Documentation

**See:** `.github/actions/README.md` in each repository for:

- Detailed usage examples
- Complete API documentation
- Cross-platform notes
- Maintenance guidelines
- Example workflows

---

## 🎓 Key Takeaways

1. **Reusable actions are powerful** - Write once, use everywhere
2. **Caching saves time** - Huge performance improvements
3. **Composite actions are simple** - Just YAML, no TypeScript/Docker
   needed
4. **Consistency matters** - Same tools, same versions across repos
5. **Testable code is better** - Bash scripts can be run locally

---

**Status:** ✅ Actions copied and integrated into cargo-fmt-toml

**Next:** These actions are ready to use in cargo-version-info and
dotenvage when needed

Commit message:

docs(manager): remove private repository references
- Remove dr-rs-ekg references from actions README
- Update REUSABLE_ACTIONS_SUMMARY.md to remove source references
- Replace ekg/dr-rs-ekg example with generic myapp/production example

REUSABLE_ACTIONS_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Reusable GitHub Actions - Summary

## ✅ What Was Copied

I've copied three reusable composite actions to:

- **cargo-fmt-toml**
- **cargo-version-info**
- **dotenvage**

## 📦 Actions Copied

### 1. setup-cargo-binstall

**What it does:**

- Installs `cargo-binstall` for fast binary installations
- Caches the binary between workflow runs
- Cross-platform support (Linux, macOS, Windows)

**Benefits:**

- ⚡ 10-50x faster than `cargo install` for most tools
- 💾 Cached, so subsequent runs are instant
- 🌍 Works across all platforms

**Usage in workflows:**

```yaml
- name: Setup cargo-binstall
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cargo-binstall
```

---

### 2. setup-cocogitto

**What it does:**

- Installs Cocogitto (`cog`) version 6.5.0
- Uses cargo-binstall for fast installation
- Caches the binary between workflow runs

**Benefits:**

- ⚡ Much faster than `cargo install --locked cocogitto`
- 💾 Cached, so subsequent runs are ~instant
- 🔒 Pinned version ensures consistency
- 🎯 Automatically configures PATH

**Before (slow):**

```yaml
- name: Install cocogitto
  run: cargo install --locked cocogitto  # Takes 2-5 minutes!
```

**After (fast):**

```yaml
- name: Setup Cocogitto
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cocogitto  # Takes ~5 seconds, cached = instant
```

**Applied to:** `cargo-fmt-toml/.github/workflows/auto-version-bump.yml`

---

### 3. generate-changelog

**What it does:**

- Generates changelog from conventional commits
- Uses Cocogitto internally
- Smart handling of tags that don't exist yet
- Falls back gracefully for first release

**Benefits:**

- 📝 Automatic changelog generation
- 🎯 Consistent format across repositories
- 🛡️ Handles edge cases (no previous tag, tag not yet created)
- 🧪 Testable bash script (can run locally)

**Before (manual):**

```yaml
- name: Generate changelog
  run: |
    LAST_TAG=$(git describe --tags --abbrev=0 HEAD^ 2>/dev/null || echo "")
    if [ -z "$LAST_TAG" ]; then
      CHANGES=$(git log --pretty=format:"- %s" HEAD^..HEAD)
    else
      CHANGES=$(git log --pretty=format:"- %s" $LAST_TAG..HEAD^)
    fi
    # ... lots more bash code ...
```

**After (clean):**

```yaml
- name: Generate changelog
  uses: ./.github/actions/generate-changelog
  with:
    release-tag: v${{ env.NEW_VERSION }}
    output-file: CHANGELOG.md
```

**Applied to:** `cargo-fmt-toml/.github/workflows/auto-version-bump.yml`

---

## 📁 Files Added to Each Repository

### Directory Structure:

```
repo/
├── .bash/
│   └── gha-generate-changelog.sh    # Bash script for changelog generation
├── .github/
│   └── actions/
│       ├── README.md                # Documentation for all actions
│       ├── setup-cargo-binstall/
│       │   └── action.yml
│       ├── setup-cocogitto/
│       │   └── action.yml
│       └── generate-changelog/
│           └── action.yml
```

### Total Files Added:

- 4 action.yml files
- 1 bash script
- 1 README documentation

**Size:** ~350 lines of YAML + bash total

---

## 🎯 Impact on cargo-fmt-toml Workflow

### Before:

```yaml
- uses: dtolnay/rust-toolchain@stable

- name: Install cocogitto
  run: |
    cargo install --locked cocogitto    # 🐌 2-5 minutes every run

# ... manual version bump ...

- name: Generate changelog
  run: |
    # 20 lines of bash
    LAST_TAG=$(git describe --tags ...)
    # ... complex logic ...
```

### After:

```yaml
- uses: dtolnay/rust-toolchain@stable

- name: Setup Cocogitto (cached)
  uses: ./.github/actions/setup-cocogitto    # ⚡ ~5s first run, instant after

# ... version bump ...

- name: Generate changelog
  uses: ./.github/actions/generate-changelog    # ✨ Clean and simple
  with:
    release-tag: v${{ env.NEW_VERSION }}
    output-file: CHANGELOG_RELEASE.md
```

### Benefits:

- ⚡ **Faster:** 2-5 minutes → 5 seconds (first run) → instant (cached)
- 🧹 **Cleaner:** Less inline bash, more declarative
- 🔒 **Consistent:** Same cocogitto version across all repos
- 📝 **Better:** Smarter changelog generation
- 🧪 **Testable:** Bash script can be run locally

---

## 🌍 Cross-Repository Benefits

### Shared Actions Across Repositories:

All three repositories now share the same actions:

1. **cargo-fmt-toml** - Using in auto-version-bump workflow
2. **cargo-version-info** - Ready to use in future workflows
3. **dotenvage** - Ready to use in future workflows

### Maintenance:

When updating an action:

1. Update in one repository (preferably the first to need the change)
2. Copy to other repositories
3. All repos stay consistent

### Future Opportunities:

These actions can be used in any workflow that needs:

- Version management
- Changelog generation
- Fast tool installation
- Release automation

---

## 📊 Performance Comparison

### Cocogitto Installation Time:

| Method                        | First Run | Cached   |
| ----------------------------- | --------- | -------- |
| `cargo install --locked`      | 2-5 min   | 2-5 min  |
| `cargo-binstall` (manual)     | ~10 sec   | ~10 sec  |
| **`setup-cocogitto` (action)**| **~5 sec**| **~1 sec**|

**Savings:**

- First run: ~2-4 minutes faster
- Cached runs: ~2-5 minutes faster
- Over 10 workflow runs: **~30-50 minutes saved**

---

## 🚀 Next Steps

### For cargo-fmt-toml:

✅ Actions already integrated into `auto-version-bump.yml`

### For cargo-version-info:

Actions are available but not yet integrated into workflows. Consider
using in:

- Release workflows
- Version management
- Changelog generation for releases

### For dotenvage:

Actions are available but not yet integrated into workflows. Consider
using in:

- Release workflows
- Version management
- Changelog generation for releases

### For All Repos:

When creating new workflows that need version management or changelog
generation, use these actions instead of inline scripts.

---

## 📚 Documentation

**See:** `.github/actions/README.md` in each repository for:

- Detailed usage examples
- Complete API documentation
- Cross-platform notes
- Maintenance guidelines
- Example workflows

---

## 🎓 Key Takeaways

1. **Reusable actions are powerful** - Write once, use everywhere
2. **Caching saves time** - Huge performance improvements
3. **Composite actions are simple** - Just YAML, no TypeScript/Docker
   needed
4. **Consistency matters** - Same tools, same versions across repos
5. **Testable code is better** - Bash scripts can be run locally

---

**Status:** ✅ Actions copied and integrated into cargo-fmt-toml

**Next:** These actions are ready to use in cargo-version-info and
dotenvage when needed
